SYLLABUS
HIST 403: Digital History and the American Civil War
Professors Ayers and Thomas
Wilson 306
Wednesday 1500-1800

HIST 403 Course Overview

In this course students will investigate the possibilities of writing a digital history of the American
Civil War.  Using the resources of the Valley of the Shadow project, students will be able to have
quick access to original records and sources.  On research trips to archives and using microfilm
resources at Alderman Library, students will collect, examine, evaluate, and integrate primary
sources on the Civil War.  They will collaborate in teams of 4 to build a digital history web site on
the Civil War.  Individually, they will keep journals on their experience, focusing on the limitations
and possibilities of digital history.

Students will be graded on the following basis:
     
     50 % of final grade--on the web site that their team constructs
          
The grade for the team will be the grade for each member in the team.  The emphasis will be on
collaboration, creativity, historical interpretation, and balance of the final project.  Team members
are expected to work together to reach consensus on major decisions, divide work efficiently and 
fairly, and complete work in a timely and efficient manner.  Teams will be expected to make
production deadlines and meet them, take ownership of their project, and devise means for
evaluation and testing of their project. Teams will be expected to meet at least once a week for an
hour to organize and plan their site.  

     25 % of final grade--on an online journal which chronicles the student's experience with
creating digital history, explores the limitations and possibilities of this kind of history, and gives a
record of the team's creative process.

     25 % of final grade on individual participation and work in the course


Each team will be assigned a topic from the following to build a project:

     1.  Letters and Diaries of the Civil War
     2.  The Franklin Co. Home Front and the Burning of Chambersburg
     3.  The Freedmen's Bureau in Augusta Co.:  African-American Life in 
Augusta During and After the Civil War


Each team will receive a "starter kit" for their web site.  The kit will include materials from the
Valley of the Shadow research archive as well as a schedule of archives for further research.
Teams will be expected to travel to do research.  Travel expenses will be paid for. Teams will
coordinate and plan their research trip(s) with Professor Thomas.    

Each team will present a demonstration of their project in the last week of the course.  This demo
will take place in one of the networked multimedia classrooms.  They will be judged by a panel of
professionals in the field:  educators, historians, writers, programmers, and systems and
network experts.  Each team will receive a critique write-up from the members of the panel who
will also provide commentary at the demonstration. 


Week      Class
1/14       overview
1/21       readings* discussion/Basic HTML
1/28       readings* discussion/Adv. HTML
2/4        readings* discussion/Web Design and Images
2/11       workshop class
2/18       workshop class
2/25       Research 
3/4        Mid-Term Reports on Research
3/18       Research
3/25       workshop class
4/1        workshop class
4/8        workshop class
4/15       Draft Project Demo
4/22       Project Demo

*Readings will be held on reserve in Clemons Library and will be assigned weekly

Professor Edward L. Ayers
Levering Hall 203
924-7585
ela@virginia.edu

Professor William G. Thomas III
Alderman Library Room 553
924-7834
will@jefferson.village.virginia.edu
Office Hours: Wednesday 9-11 a.m. in Alderman office 3-4:30 in Wilson 306
