Escape from Danville:
Keystone State Duo Takes 160 Out
Published December 2, 1960

        Veterans of America's bloodiest war and partners in derring-do, John Shirk,
late of the 79th Pennsylvania, and John Obreiter, late of the 77th
Pennsylvania, remained in touch - even after the former moved to South
Dakota - and lived to be old men.  Or better yet, old soldiers.
        Writing to Obreiter on Oct. 30, 1906, Shirk turned his aging glance back to
a time when "comradeship was brotherhood: and when their comrades-in-arms
"were willing to undertake anything, no matter how great the risks or
hardships."
        What Shirk was remembering was the "Great Escape of 1864," when more than
100 Union prisoners, confined in Danville's Prison No. 5, crawled through a
170-foot tunnel to freedom.  Theirs is a story of camaraderie, conviction,
determination, perseverance and sweat.  Mostly sweat, for the work was
tedious and back-breaking. =20
        It is also a story of raw, unbridled courage.

Worms and greenbacks
        Skirk and Obreiter had endured more than their share of privation before
ever reaching Danville.  Captured at Chickamauga in Tennessee, they came to
Prison No. 5, a three-story warehouse on the corner of Floyd and High
streets, by a circuitous path, one which carried them through Atlanta,
Columbia, S.C., Raleigh, N.C., and finally to Richmond.
        It was in the Confederate capital that they subsisted on a "Diet of Worms,"
so called for those little wiggly white creatures that fled cowpeas during
the preparation of the soupy gruel, which was a prison delicacy.  When not
feasting on such delights, Skirk, Obreiter and their fellow prisoners passed
the time scheming against the confederate guards.  They crudely
counterfeited banknotes in pen-and-ink, transformed "one dollar" greenbacks
into $10 notes by dint of a primitive eraser and a deft hand, and sold
anything they could get their hands on.
        On November 11, 1863, after "residing" in Richmond for about six weeks, the
two men and the rest of the Chickamauga prisoners were loaded into
foul-smelling cattle cars and sent to Danville, where six tobacco warehouses
had been turned into prisons.  No., 5, where the Pennsylvanians called home,
was an L-shaped brick structure with a two-story frame annex attached to the
rear wing.  This annex was divided into four rooms, two on each floor.  The
building was surrounded by a high fence and patrolled closely by sentries.
In charge of No. 5, which housed 1,000 men, was a certain Mr. Christ of
Baltimore, or "Little Christ," as he was known to the Yankee prisoners.
        These toughened veterans of bivouac and battlefield quickly settled into
old routines.  "Greenbacks" were produced, a building-wide black market was
established, and schemes were hatched.  With either "exchange" or "escape"
on everyone's mind, plans were forever being made, revised and revised again
on how best to break out.  A few were actually implemented.

Early failures
        As one must first learn to crawl before walking and then to walk before
running, so too must prisoners accept defeat, then halting progress, and
finally limited success before pulling off a "great escape."  The Danville
experience proved no different for Shirk and Obreiter.
        The first attempted escape from No. 5 was betrayed by a prisoner anxious to
curry favor with the guards.  His perfidy was uncovered and he was nearly
hanged.  Saved by the propitious arrival of guards, the man was hustled out
of No. 5.
        In early Dec. 1863, 10 prisoners, the most enterprising being Corporal
Jacob Isenberger of the 77th Pennsylvania, swore themselves to secrecy and
decided to dig a tunnel to just beyond the guardline, via which they could
escape one night under the cover of darkness.
        Tight-lipped and guarded, the conspirators pried a board loose in the
first-floor corner where Isenberger was quartered.  Without drawing
attention to themselves, the men would dispatch a small work squad through
the tiny opening and then restore Isenberger's small cache of belongings to
its rightful space.  Day after day, these men descended into the crawlspace
beneath the first floor and, armed with only an old knife, a few sticks and
inordinate amounts of patience and elbow grease, would work resolutely
toward their goal. =20
        Isenberger did much of the digging, depositing the earth near the tunnel
opening.  Three weeks of "the hardest kind of work" passed before he reached
a point far enough beyond the guardline for the group's purpose.
        And so one night late in December, the men who dug the tunnel - save for
Isenberger, whose Herculean efforts brought on a severe case of rheumatism -
dropped into the passage to lead the first contingent out.  By this time,
however, news of the tunnel had spread throughout the building and soon men
were pouring into the opening.  The clamor alarmed the guards, who rushed
into the building and, by force of bayonet, drove all the prisoners to the
second floor.  About 70, however, managed to escape.  It has never been
determined just how many made the Union lines - and safety.

Dawn-to-dusk digging
        Stringent precautions were employed by "Little Christ" in wake of this
breakout.  No longer could the prisoners congregate on the first floor at
night; no longer could they mill about in the prison yard where the privies
were located.  The old warehouse was checked three times daily at irregular
intervals - sometimes at night and sometimes by "Little Christ" himself.
And the tunnel was filled in - and supposedly forgotten.
        Except by Shirk and Obreiter and a number of other prisoners, who began
making plans almost immediately after the first try proved abortive.
Calling themselves "The Prisoners Union Safety League," they pledged their
secrecy to a new escape attempt. =20
        The League's best-laid plans revolved about a small kitchen, 12 to 15 feet
square, some 80 feet from Isenberger's corner.  If a tunnel could be
extended beneath the kitchen, perhaps this building could screen the
prisoners' escape.  But first they had to get to the kitchen, a task far
easier said than done.
        Hopes were buttressed by the fact that 22 of the Leaguers lived in the two
rooms on the second floor of the frame annex.  Day and night, men dropped
through a small opening to the machinery room on the annex's first floor.
It was in this room that a length of iron, 15 inches long, 1 1/2 inches
wide, and on-eighth of an inch thick, was secured.  With this crude tool,
fastened to a piece of pine which served as a handle, Shirk and Obreiter
endeavored to cut through stone and scrape away pounds and pounds of clay=
 soil.
        Early in January, work began.  Day after day, the board in the annex floor
was replaced and a bit of dirt was passed over it so as not to arouse
suspicion.  Meanwhile, on the level below, boards were removed from the
floor of the machinery room and meticulously replaced.  The entrance to the
old tunnel stood 90 feet away, diagonally across the building.  The diggers,
led by Shirt and Obreiter, worked in silence, so careful were they not to
alarm the guards who walked their beats just feet away on the outside of the
building and mere inches above them on the first floor.
        No less than four walls, including the foundation, stood between the
diggers and the entrance to Isenberger's tunnel.  Boring through the
foundation from the annex took days, yet completion of this task did not
assure the workers of any relief, staring them in the face was a wall of
earth which reached nearly as high as the floorboards.  Undaunted, they
accepted this weighty chore and struggled on.
        Their lone worry was where to put all the dirt; they could no longer work
the fill back to the machinery room without the guards detecting the large
quantities of earth.  Fortunately, Obreiter discovered what proved to be an
old cistern, a large opening to the left of the trench he was digging.  So
this concern was remedied, and the work dragged on into February.
        As the tunnelers pierced each wall in their path, their work became
increasingly easier as the slope of the land downward grew more pronounced.
This meant less digging.  Finally, after the fourth wall was breached, the
mouth of the old tunnel appeared.
        Shirt and Obreiter, working in alternate shifts, reopened this passage and
- slowly, painstakingly but surely - commenced burrowing toward the kitchen.
Light was provided by the dim flame of a lard lamp - an old piece of tin
shaped into a cup and filled with lard, with a piece of string for a wick -
as yards and yards of dirt were passed backward via a small wooden box.
Shifts beneath the ground became shorter and shorter as breathing grew more
and more labored. But still the work went on.
        On Feb. 25, Obreiter, working tirelessly from dawn until dusk, jabbed his
digging tool into the ground above his head.  Air sifted through, and then
light, long slashes of light as if seeping through ... floorboards.  He
jabbed harder and felt wood.  The kitchen!
        Three days later, on a night when the moon rose late in the winter sky, the
League assembled in the annex room and then, one by one, disappeared into
the darkness.  Then, in orderly fashion, came their fellow prisoners.  No
less than 160 had made their way unnoticed to the kitchen and beyond, to the
streets of Danville, when a city woman heard the hushed sounds of whispers
and the pounding of heels.  She correctly surmised a prison break and
reported it to the proper authorities.

Breakout
        Obreiter, Shirk and their traveling companion, Frank Sweeney of the 2nd
Michigan Cavalry, slipped quietly away from the kitchen - just as a lonely
sentinel was issuing his standard "Post No. 5 and all is well" - and lit out
of town in a southerly direction, hoping to confuse any and all pursuers.
The following night they turned east - for Suffolk and its Union garrison.
        Three days into their journey, they met another trio of escapees, all of
whom hailed from Indiana.  Walking by night and hiding by day they inched
gradually eastward, nourished by whatever they could obtain from friendly
slaves, one of whom joined them to swell their ranks to seven. =20
        Danger swirled constantly around these sojourners.  One night near
Hicksford (now Emporia), they dodged an old Rebel scout riding a white
horse.  Shortly thereafter, en route to Weldon, N.C., from Hicksford, they
hid in a long row of bushes as a train full of Confederate infantry raced
past them.
        But one day in Southampton County, their good luck finally ran out.  Shirk
was captured when he followed the runaway slave to - of all places - the
county sheriff's home in search of rations.  Obreiter and Sweeney were
nabbed to nights later by a detachment of cavalrymen from the 31st of North
Carolina.
        And thus began another Marienbad-esque series of events which took the two
Pennsylvanians to the dungeon of Libby Prison in Richmond, to Belle Isle
Prison, and finally to dreaded Andersonville.
        No need to be alarmed, though, Obreiter and Shirk busted out of that joint
too.  And lived to write about it.
=09
More Than One 'Great Escape'
        The gritty and determined three-month-long effort that culminated in the
"Great Escape" from No. 5 was not the only successful prison break from
Danville during the Civil War, merely, the most notable.
        In fact, on at least three other occasions, Union prisoners went "over (or
under) the wall" to freedom.  To wit:
=95             In the fall of 1864, the Confederacy, the ranks of its armies thinning,
reassigned many prison guards to the front lines.  This left the prisons
woefully understaffed - and Yankee detainees were quick to take advantage.
On Oct. 10 in Danville, more than 100 Federal detainees overpowered a
depleted shift and raced to safety.
        Two such Yankees were Joseph L. Johnson and William Morehead Gibson, both
of the 100th Pennsylvania Volunteers.  Future brothers-in-law, Johnson and
Gibson stole away with an unnamed young soldier from Cincinnati, Ohio.  The
trio traveled at night, and received food and assistance from friendly=
 slaves.
        The Ohio youth, however, soon fell ill from eating raw mutton and
chestnuts.  Foreseeing his own death, he told Johnson and Gibson to continue
on and gave them his mother's picture, her address and a watch.
        Upon reaching Union lines around Knoxville, Tenn., Gibson sorrowfully wrote
the boy's mom and grieved over the fact that he and Johnson left the young
man to die.  Then on afternoon in Knoxville, Gibson saw this soldier, the
picture of health, bounding down a street, whistling and smiling.  A
miracle?  Well, a minor one.  A group of slaves found the boy on death's
door and nursed him back to health.
=95             As detailed by Second Lieutenant Joseph Ferguson in his prison journal=
 -
kept "more as an employment for my mind and to help pass the tedious hours
than anything else" - men held in Prison No. 2 put an old oven near the Dan
River to good use during the frigid winter of 1864-65.  Conditions were
particularly abominable in No. 2; windows were broken out and prisoners
slept on bare floors, most without benefit of a blanket.  Small wonder then
that 12 to 15 men were dying daily - and that desperation was riding high.
But then the oven, and the carelessness of the guards, came into play.  Men
would volunteer for the water detail on the river, 200 yards from the
guardline on Spring Street.  En route to the water, a few would deliberately
dawdle and then race to the oven, located on the sight of an old bakery.
And there they would stay, huddled until nightfall.  No less than 18 men
escaped in this manner - and the Confederate guards were never the wiser.
Hobbled by rheumatism from sleeping on wet floors, Ferguson contemplated
such an escape but could never go through with it.  He left Danville in the
substantial prisoner exchange of mid-February 1865.                                                                                             Ferguson
also detailed in his diary the abortive escape effort of Dec. 10, 1864.  The
plan, orchestrated by Brigadier General Alfred Napoleon Alexander Duffie, a
flamboyant Frenchman, was :rash and foolish" in Ferguson's mind.  And that
it proved to be as the escapees, led by Duffie, only got as far as a
second-floor guard room before a large group of Confederates entered No. 2
and quickly recaptured them.
=95             Smallpox played a significant role in the escape of six Union soldiers
from the Danville prisons.  Lieutenant W. H. Newlin of the 73rd Illinois
came down with a mild case of the disease during the epidemic of December
1863.  He recovered rapidly and was appointed a wardmaster at the hastily
constructed prison hospital on Lee Street.  Allowed to select his own
helpers to care for the patients, Newlin, naturally, chose five close
friends.  Soon, they were pondering the means of escape.                                                                                                        One
evening, in the waning days of the epidemic, the six men slipped away from
Lee Street and headed south toward Wolf Island Creek and the North Carolina
line.  Upon crossing the creek, they turned west and then eventually north,
toward West Virginia - and the succor of the Union lines.  Four of the six
made it safely, with Newlin, after the war, taking up residence in his
hometown - Danville, Illinois.
=09
A Cut Above Andersonville
        "Stop thief!"
        "Raiders!"
        "Ten o'clock, Post No. 8, and all's w-e-l-l."
        "Take your hand in, Yank, or I shoot."
        No these are not the sounds of the men working on some latter-day chain
gang, but rather are the guttural warnings and intonations heard once upon a
time for 15 months on the streets of downtown Danville. =20
        Between December 1863 and February 1865, Danville was wartime home to more
than 7,000 Union prisoners.  But it was a home many would have just as soon
forgotten.  Or avoided, if such were possible.
        Though conditions were intolerable from the outset, the Danville prisons
were a cut above the hellholes of Andersonville, Ga., and Salisbury, N.C.
But that's damning with faint praise, for most every prison camp in that day
and age was a study in utter deprivation and, in some cases, wanton=
 depravity.
        The Danville prisoners, however, were fortunate to have as their commandant
Colonel Robert C. Smith, "a cool, brave man and though strict in his prison
regulations, ... a humane gentleman."  But, as overseer of a ghastly
enterprise in a crumbling nation, not even Smith could prevent the steady
deterioration of conditions at the six prison buildings.
        The prisons suffered from a lack of provisions.  Food and clothing were at
a premium in the dying Confederacy; thus, there was little to be had for the
imprisoned soldiers of the enemy.  Or was there?
        Lieutenant Alonzo Cooper of the 12th New York Cavalry, in his war journal,
maintained that Federal prisoners were "dying of starvation in the midst of
plenty."  Danville, a vital rail depot, boasted - or so Cooper said - whole
buildings filled with captured Union food, particularly, hard tack and
bacon.  Nonetheless, over one 26-day period, said Cooper, the prisoners
'lone daily ration was a single piece of corn bread, known to the
Northerners as a "Johnny cake."  As meager as these rations were, they were
often unedible as well.
        Fortunately, some of this ill-prepared fare was negated by the generosity
of individual Danvillians, men such as B. F. Ficklin and Dr. George Dame,
the rector of The Episcopal Church of the Epiphany.  Both visited the
prisons weekly, if not daily, often atop wagons laden with food. Of Dr.
Dame, a New Hampshire man by birth, it was said, "More than Rebel or
Federal, he was a Christian man."
        Man of God though he was, Dr. Dame could, however, do little about the
weather.  The two winters the prisoners weathered happened to be unbearably
- and usually - cold.  On New Year's Day 1864 and the night after, the
thermometer barely crept above zero.  The men in the old warehouses cum
prisons either tramped incessantly about on the cold wood floors in an
effort to keep warm or huddled around the stoves, bullying and bartering
their way to better positions.  And when they weren't fighting the cold,
these Yankees were waging "pitched battles" against the ubiquitous vermin
        Small wonder then that disease was rampant throughout the six buildings.
No sooner had the prisoners arrived in late 1863 when a smallpox epidemic
broke out.  Many died, and thousands of others carried the unsightly
evidence of vaccination - a huge elbow-to-shoulder scab, the product either
of impure blood or, as some alleged, deliberately impure vaccine.
        For weeks, the hastily constructed prison hospital on Lee Street was full.
And the days for such dedicated humanitarians as Dr. Levi Holbrook and Nurse
Anne Eliza Johns (for whom the local chapter of the United Daughters of the
Confederacy is named) were long and strenuous.  For all the hard work of
these volunteers, the death wagon made daily trips to the small but growing
cemetery yard by the hospital.  The burial ground, the permanent resting
place of 1,323 Yankee soldiers, is now a national cemetery.
        As the war drew to a close, the sad situation worsened.  Writing to Col. R.
H. Chilton of the Inspector General's office on Jan. 27, 1865, Inspecting
Officer A. S. Cunningham said, "The prisons at this post are in very bad
condition, dirty, filled with vermin, little or no ventilation, and there is
an insufficiency of fireplaces for the proper warmth of the Federal
prisoners therein confined ... The prisoners have almost no clothing, no
blankets, and a very small supply of food."  By then, the mortality rate had
risen to five prisoners daily.
        The prisoners, however, grew philosophical about their lot.  Alfred S. Roe
of the Ninth, New York Heavy Artillery, a prisoner in Danville for upwards
of eight months, wrote in his journal that Colonel Smith and his underlings
did "as well as they could, but their best was bad enough."
        Of the 105 men from the Ninth New York who came to Danville with Roe, 27
never left.
        All told, about 7,500 Union soldiers landed in Danville as prisoners, 4,000
coming on the first string of cattle cars which left Richmond on Nov. 11,
1863..  Only 3,000 survived.  By war's end, an  d in wake of the massive
prisoner exchange of February 1865, only 763 prisoners remained in Danville
when Gen. Horatio Wright's VI Corps occupied the city.
        The final question:  Why Danville as a prison center?  Well, the city was
easily accessible to Richmond by rail and yet farm removed from the
hostilities of war.  Furthermore, in its many tobacco warehouses, Danville
possessed ready-made prison buildings.
        Six such three-story edifices, three of which were owned by tobacco
manufacturers J. W. and C. G. Holland, were selected to house the prisoners.
Four of these buildings were clustered about the intersection of Spring and
Union streets; a fifth was located on the corner of High and Floyd streets,
and the sixth, the turreted home of the Dibrell tobacco concern, stood on
the corner of Loyal and Lynn streets.
        So listen as you pass these locations, and perhaps you can still hear the
sounds: "Raiders!"
        "Take your hand in, Yank, ..."

In Search of a Tunnel
        All intimidating comments aside - my good composing-room buddy Rosser Lee
painted grisly pictures of dog-like "sewer rats" weaned on methane gas - I
thought it would be oh so romantic, searching for the secret tunnel out of
Prison No. 5.
        So out of touch was I that on Wednesday afternoon I drove to the old brick
warehouse on the corner of High and Floyd in my tie and jacket.
Fortunately, the building was all locked up, closed for the day.  But I did
learn something.  After surveying the property with my guide Danny Rickets,
one of  Danville's resident historians, I concluded that I had better wear
some old clothes when we went down looking for that hole in the foundation
on Thursday morning.
        Come Thursday, my clothes were different, but my mindset hadn't changed a
bit.  Deign I compare my feelings with those of Columbus about the Indies,
but I really thought we would find that hole, and without much trouble.
        As Ol' Waylon might say, "Wrong."
        You see, problems existed unforeseen by us on Wednesday.  For starters, the
1897 map and floorplan doesn't conform to the reality of the present.
Perhaps the old soldier who drew that floorplan from memory a few decades
after the escape erred in his remembrance.  Perhaps after the prison
building burned in 1885, the new structure while similar in pattern and use,
didn't follow the old foundation.  Or perhaps it did, and the builders
poured a new foundation atop the old one.  If so, Danny and I would have to
do a mess of digging - and we hadn't brought a shovel.
        Whatever.
        Well, dressed more appropriately in jeans, thermal underwear and flannel
shirt, I walked beside Danny into that warehouse on a morning cold and
getting colder.  On the first floor, we searched the ancient crossbeams for
any evidence - names scrawled in he wood - of Yankee soldiers, thinking
perhaps that some of the original beams were salvaged from the fire.  No
such luck.
        We then descended a narrow stairway to the ground floor - a dark, stark
affair that had the look and feel of the tobacco warehouse it once was.
Most recently home to Schewel's Furniture merchandise and before that, to
the Anderson Bros. clothing concern, the building was made for the bright
leaf.  Not used for much now, the brick pile justifies its existence as a
haven for spider and, we hoped, the effluvia of history.
        We walked leisurely down to the corner where, as the map indicated, the
tunnelers broke out.  Nothing - but then we didn't expect anything.  We
would have to find a cellar or even a crawl space, if any existed.
        And then we saw a staircase.  In my naivete, I thought it was the
staircase. Again, wrongo.
        It led merely to the furnace room of the post-1885 building.  Still, maybe,
just maybe, I thought.  Trailing the beam of a flashlight, we went over to
the corner of note and discovered that it had been a coal receptacle.  We
didn't stay long.
        From there, we followed another staircase, or what passed for one, to the
chilly, gray light of mid-morning.  In this courtyard, we surmised that,
yes, the warehouse might once have been an L-shaped building, but had since
witnessed an addition or two.  We also tried to figure out where the
two-story frame annex, the starting point for the breakout, was located.
        As we stumbled back down to the furnace room, Danny remembered passing a
couple of loose floorboards at the corner of a room on the ground floor.
For such historical prospectors as we, these boards amounted to an
invitation.  So we took them up, and Danny, flashlight in hand, dropped into
the darkness.  He was staring at the foundation.  Maybe, maybe.
        This "maybe" still applies, for while we didn't find the hole, we uncovered
plenty of evidence that told us we were on the right track.  Of course,
after decade upon decade of change and erosion, we may never find the hole,
but in that dark and dusty crawl space, we did unearth enough treasures to
keep us coming back.  And, after drawing down there with Danny, I quickly
gained a healthy respect for Shirk and Obreiter and all the others who, day
after grimy day, chipped their way toward freedom.
        Digging with an old piece of wood, Danny found pieces of charcoal (carbon
dating one day might tell us whether these slivers are the remains of the
blaze of 1885), crumbly sheets of roofing tin, a mess of old nails, and
pieces of fire-scarred glass.  Amid the rubble, we also discovered bottles
(one perhaps dating back before the invention of the automatic bottling
machine), old boards, a textile spindle, and what looked like the skeleton
of a small animal, perhaps a pup trapped in the crawl space.
        Some things still bother us, like the discrepancies between the 1897
floorplan and the actual lay of the land.  Was the prison really on that
corner?  The charred wood makes us believe it was.  And perhaps one day this
belief will be transformed into certainty.
        After the holidays, we will go once again in search of the trail of those
intrepid escapees.  Only this time, we'll bring a shovel.  And I won't even
think of going into the building dressed in a jacket and tie.
        But the romance?  That I will continue to wear - on my sleeve.


No Treasure, Only Wisdom
Published February 24, 1991


        Perhaps it was all that uproarious hype which surrounded Geraldo Rivera's
seriocomical ("serio," for him, "comical,' for us boob-tube viewers) attempt
to plumb the depths of Al Capone's vault; perhaps - and this is more likely
- it was simply a fascination with things Danville, touched with the
excitement and mystery of a good old-fashioned treasure hunt.
        Whatever the reason, folks in these parts have been truly interested in my
search for any evidence of the "Great Escape" from Confederate Prison No. 5
in 1864.  Back in December, Danny Ricketts, Danville local historian without
portfolio, and I went on a reconnaissance mission to the site of this
breakout, the present day Schewel's warehouse at the corner of High and
Floyd streets.  What we discovered piqued our curiosity; we decided, then
and there, to go back one day.  Thursday was that day.  Here's my update,
promised in print also most three months ago.
        Nothing.
        Armed with shovels, a GI digging tool (courtesy of Danville vet Blair
Cassada), a lamp, a flashlight, a sifter, a camera and high, high hopes, we
dropped into the building's crawl space and commenced digging.  Thirty
minutes passed, then 60, and finally 90.  Nothing.  Or at least nothing
worth mentioning.  Sure, much like the first time we went down there, we
found plenty of charcoal (evidence of the 1885 fire that destroyed the
original prison building), some old roofing tin, some primitive nails and a
few shards of glass.  But that was it.  With Danny doing a lion's share of
the digging, we moved a considerable amount of dirt - dirt void of
archaeological significance.


        This similar lack of success led Danny to say, "I don't know how they it;
archaeologists dig for years, and never find anything."
        Amen to that.  But then again, it's not as if we didn't find anything.  As
the photo which accompanies this column shows, our clothes and faces found
plenty of soot.  And I ended up finding a hellacious headcold down there as
well.
        Still, we left the cramped crawl space with an even healthier appreciation
for those Yankees who tunneled an amazing 170 feet to freedom, using nothing
save a crude piece of  iron 15 inches long.
        I also learned that treasure-hunting, borne of optimism and undertaken
vigorously, can nevertheless be a fruitless, thankless and messy job.
        And to think I once wanted to be a historical archeologist.  No way - no
patience.


5.  A Near-Epic End
Published March 8, 1991


        "The monuments may be mute, but the progress of America, and the prosperity
of Danville, are living testimonials to those of yesteryear who fought the
good fight and kept the faith."
                                                                        Dr. James I. Robertson
        Ah, but for the quirks of history, what might have been...
        Lawrence McFall, a local Civil War and railroad enthusiast, frequently
kicks back and ponders the possibilities:  What if Robert E. Lee and his
Army of Northern Virginia - tattered, torn and famished, but still unbowed -
had made it to Danville?
        Well, most certainly, there would have been trouble right here in (the)
River City.
        All references to "The Music Man" aside, Danville was, in fact, Lee's
destination when he left the defenses ringing Petersburg and headed west
along the south bank of the Appomattox River in early April 1865.