<html><title>War Comes Home: Chambersburg, Summer of 1864</title>
<head>
<center><table width=480><tr><td>
<h3>Lee in Chambersburg</h3>
General Lee, as he sit on his horse that day in the public square of Chambersburg, looked every inch a soldier.
He was at that time about	fifty years of age, stoutly built, of medium height, hair strongly mixed with gray, and a rough, gray beard. He wore the usual Confederate gray, with some little ornamentation about the collar of his coat. His hat was a soft black without ornament other than a military cord around the crown. His whole appearance indicated dignity, composure, and disregard for the gaudy trappings of war and the honor attaching to his high station. Any one who had ever seen his picture, as it is found in the various histories of the war, would have bad no difficulty in singling him out in a crowd. General Lee seemed to have not only the most profound respect of his men - officers and privates-but their admiration and love. With some few exceptions among the officers, some of whom quietly expressed their feelings to some of our citizens, and seemed to fear that they had made a mistake in coming into our State, the whole army had the most unbounded confidence in their commanding general, and would unhesitatingly follow him wherever he would lead them.<p>
The men composing the general's staff were a splendid looking body. Finely mounted, neatly dressed, and excellent in horsemanship, they presented an appearance which those who witnessed them will be likely ever to remember.
There were with the Confederates, presumably with that group, two officers of the British army and one of the Prussian. Those officers were, no doubt, expecting and desiring to witness the downfall of the Republic. That such was the case with at least one . of them - Colonel Freemantle of the British service-is demonstrated in an article he afterward wrote for Blackwood's Magazine, in which he narrates the events of the Pennsylvania campaign. His abuse of the people of the border, and of the ladies of Chambersburg, whom lie calls "viragoes," his congratulations to General Longstreet upon the apparent success of Pickett's great charge on the afternoon of the third day's battle, and his regret at their repulse, clearly show his hatred of our country and its institutions. We heard at the time of the presence of these foreign officers, but did not distinguish them from others.<p>
In that group of distinguished men were the brains of the vast, moving host which came swarming through our borders, and while we were inclined to admire their genius, we yet looked upon them as the enemies of our country, and could only hope and pray that they would meet the terrible overthrow which they deserved.  In precisely one week from the day of this imposing pageant, our hopes and
prayers were realized, and the defeated hosts were thrown
back from the heights of Gettysburg, and with their
crushing defeat commenced the decline and downfall of
the cause for which they fought.
General Lee selected for his head - quarters a grove which then stood along the pike leading to Gettysburg, near the eastern edge of Chambersburg. It was once known as  "Shetter's Woods" but afterward as  "Messersmith's Woods," after the late George R. Messersmith, Esq., who at the time referred to owned it. It was for many years the place where picnics and Fourth of July celebrations were held. The Centennial Anniversary of American Independence, on July 4th, 1876, was held there. The grove has recently been cut down, and the place is now a cultivated field. It was a beautiful location, and from Friday, June 26th, to Tuesday morning, 30th, General Lee and his staff tarried there. There he held his councils of war, there lie received reports from the various parts of his vast army, and there he planned and ordered an attack on the capital of our State, and there on the night of -Monday, 29th, when Longstreet's scout brought information of the whereabouts of the Army of the Potomac, he recalled that order and decided to cross the South Mountain and fight a battle -upon the direct line to Baltimore and Washington. Other acts of importance which transpired upon this historic spot during those memorable four days of General Lee's residence there, will be given in their appropriate places.<p>
In the morning of this day- Friday, 26th, Early's division left its camp at Greenwood, where it had remained over the previous day, and proceeded by the pike to Gettysburg on its way to York, according to instruction given General Early by General Ewell at the visit of the former to the latter's head -quarters near Chambersburg the day before. While on their way across the mountain they burned the Caledonia Iron Works, which belonged to Hon. Thaddeus Stevens.  These works were situated about two miles east of Greenwood, at the base of the South Mountain, and about ten miles from Chambersburg. They consisted of a large charcoal furnace, forge, rolling mill, coal house, shops, stables, and other buildings. On Tuesday, June 16th, as has been said, while Jenkins' cavalry occupied Chambersburg, a marauding party visited these works, and upon the condition that they should be spared, all the horses and mules belonging to the premises were delivered to them. Hon. Joha Sweeney, Mr. Stevens' business manager, says that he had an interview with General Early, as he sat upon his horse that day, and endeavored to dissuade him from executing his threat to destroy these works. He told him that so far as Mr. Stevens was concerned, lie would be better off if his works had been destroyed ten years before, but for the sake of the many poor people who were dependent. upon them for support, and would be t1irown out of employment if they were destroyed, lie should spare them. To this appeal General Early replied, "That is not the way Yankees do business. They do not go on unless they make money.  Then, Mr. Stevens is an enemy of the South. He is in favor of confiscating their property and arming the negroes. His property must be destroyed."  General Early then specially detailed Colonel French to apply the torch, and the whole was soon a mass of smouldering ruins.  ( I am indebted to Professor J. Fraise Richard, the historian, for a copy of a letter from General Early to him, in response to an inquiry as to his reasons for destroying Mr. Stevens' iron works. General Early says in his letter from Lynchburg, Virginia, May 7th, 1886:
"No column of our troops was sent to burn the iron works of Thaddeus Stevens, near Greenwood, in the campaign into Pennsylvania, in 1863. My division of Ewell's corps was ordered to move along the western base of South Mountain until it came to the road from Chambersburg to Gettysburg, which I did, passing through Waynesborough and one or two smaller villages. I found the iron works above mentioned on the road aforesaid, where it begins to ascend the South Mountain, and they were burned by my order, and on my own responsibility. My reasons for giving the order were founded on the fad that the Federal troops had invariably burned such works in the South, wherever they had penetrated, and notably among them the iron works of Hon. John Bell, of Tennessee, who was the Constitutional candidate for the presidency in 186o, and who was too old to take any part in the war then pending. Moreover, in some speeches in congress, Mr. Stevens had exhibited a most vindictive spirit toward the people of the South, as he continued to do to the day of his death. This burning was simply in retaliation for various deeds of barbarity perpetrated by Federal troops in some of
the Southern States, as was the subsequent burning of Chambersburg in 1864.
" Respe&fully yours, etc.,	J. A. EARLY.")
<p>
</td></tr></table>
</body></html>
