       <html><title>War Comes Home: Chambersburg, Summer of 1864</title>
<head><body><center><table width=480><tr><td>

<center><h3>Slinguff's Letter</h3></center>

            Southern Historical Society Papers
       
             From Pennsylvania-German, July, 1909
         <center>THE BURNING OF 
         CHAMBERSBURG.</center>
       
        NOTE. This article, published in the Baltimore, 
       American, March 28, 1909, and written by Lieut. 
       Fielder C.Slinguff, who was a member of the First 
       Maryland Cavalry, C. S. A., and is now a prominent 
       lawyer, citizen, clubman and churchman of Baltimore, 
       Md., was sent for publication by Captain Frederck, 
       M. Colston, of the same place. The letter, beside the 
       following: "As an act of simple justice and for 
       historical accuracy,  I ask you to publish this, as an 
       addenda to the Rev. Dr, Seibert's account of the 
       burning of Chambersburg," contained a clippin 
       from the Baltimore Sun  of April 26, 1909, as follows:
       
       <p>"Sheridan, like Sherman, indulged his proclivities for
       pillage and destruction only after the last cestige of Confederate
       military organization had vanished from his front, and it was on
       a people incapable of armed resistance that vengeance was
       wreaked. Some idea of the pitiless and wanton devastation
       wrought in the valley may be gathered from the report of a
       committee appointed just after the close of the hostilities by the
       county court of Rockingham to estimate the havoc inflicted on
       the property of noncombatants under Sheridan's orders in that
       county alone:
       
       <p>"Dwellings burned, 36; barns burned, 450; mills burned,
       31; fences destroyed .(miles), 100; bushels of wheat destroyed,
       100,000 bushels of corn destroyed, 50,000; tons of bay
       destroyed, 6,233; cattle carried off, 1,750 head; horses and hogs
       carried Off, 3,35o head; factories burned, 3; furnace burned, z.
       In addition, there was an immense amount of farming utensils of
       every description destroyed, many of them of great value, such
       as reapers and threshing machines, also household and kitchen
       furniture, and money, bonds, plate, etc., pillaged.
       
       <p>"We are glad to print this article written 25 years ago, sup-
       plementary to Dr. Seibert's vivid description written 5o years ago.
       The two papers give us opposite aspects of the same events and
       have for this reason unusual historical value."
       
           <p>  
 An interesting contribution to the literature of the Civil War
             in, of the burning of Chambersburg written by Mr.
             Slingluff, of the law firm of Slingluff & Slingluff,
             lie was present at the destruction of the town as a
       member of the First
                Maryland Cavalry, and his account is ' accordingly, from the standpoint of a Confederate soldier. For
       25 years Mr. Slingluff's narrative has been tucked away in
       archives, which gives it added historic interest.
       The account of the event is in the form of a letter to Mr. Ephriam Hiteshew, of Chambersburg, Pa., who prevailed upon Mr.
       Slingluff to write it in connection with some reminiscences compiled by Mr. Hoke, of Chambersburg. The letter telling of the
       destruction which Mr. Singluff has permitted to be published,
       is as follows:
                      BALTIMORE, AUGUST 1, 1884<p>
      
        <i> Epraim Hiteshew, Esq., Chambersburg, Pa.:</i><p>
         My Dear Sir: I have received the papers sent me by you
       containing Mr. Hoke's reminiscences of the burning of 
       Chambersburg, and have carefully read them. At your request I will
       give you my recollection of the events which immediately pre-
       ceded and followed that occurrence.
        I write from the standpoint of the private soldier, having had
        no knowledge of the reasons which dictated official orders at,
        the time, nor had my associates. We simply obeyed orders.
       I do not pretend to give dates, distances, names of places, of
       persons or localities with precision. Twenty years is a long
       span in a man's life, and as I passed through many stirring events
       during the war this one did not make as great an impression
       upon me as it did upon those who immediately suffered from it.
        I believe, though, that that 2o years has so curbed and 
        tempered the excitement of early manhood and mollified the passions and resentments of war that I can write calmly and without bias on the subject. At least such will be my endeavor. At
       the same time I shall not hesitate to speak frankly and freely
       from my standpoint. To do less would render valueless, for
       the purpose of impartial history, anything which I might say.
<center> The First Maryland Cavalry</center><p>
        Mr. Hoke's articles are as temperate as possible from on,
       whose house was burned by an enemy, and as, he thinks, with-
       out justification. It is true he calls us "villains" occasionally,
       and says we seemed accustomed to the business from the expert
       way in which we proceeded to the task. I will not quarrel with
       him for this, but I think it proper to take a look at these villains
       to see who they were then and what they are now.   I was a
       young man not yet arrived at maturity. I had just left college
       when I joined the Confederate army. When I marched for
       Chambersburg I belonged to the First Maryland Cavalry. This
       regiment was composed of the very first young men of our State.
       If they were not guided by the strongest instincts of principle
       in going into the Southern army and staying there they are
       certainly a very peculiar set of young men, for there was any-
       thing but pleasure in our lives.<p>
       
       We were generally hungry, slept often, winter and summer, in
       the open air on the ground, got no pay that we could buy
       anything with, were scantily clad and were apt to be killed,
       sooner or later in battle. I believe the unbiased man must say
       this was patriotism, although he can, if he wishes, reconcile his
       conscience by calling it "misguided patriotism." And you may
       be surprised to know that these young "villains" have generally
       developed into good citizens and successful men. Go where you
       will through our State, and you will find them respected and at
       the head of the communities in which they live. In business I
       can name you a dozen of the leading houses in this city whose
       members were with Johnson and McCausland, when your city
       was burned. The bar throughout the State is fun of them; and
       they are, in many cases, among the leaders of their circuits.
       They are doctors in good standing in their profession; and many
       of the most thrifty farmers in this State, whose fine farms attest
       devotion to duty and to home, especially in such counties as
       Howard and Montgomery, were also present on that occasion.
        <p>In addition to our regiment there were five or six others in
       the Ibrigade, most of them from Southwest Virginia and the
       Valley ofVirginia.  The men who composed these 
       regiments were the substantial citizens of their respective counties, and
       would compare favorably with the like number of men selected
       from any agricultural community in our country.<p>
       
              A RETALIATORY MEASURE<p>
       
       Now you would like to know if the men whom 1 have
       described justified the burning of your town, in their individual
       capacity, irrespective of the orders from headquarters, under
       which they acted. I must say to you frankly that they did, and I
       never heard one dissenting voice. And why did we justify so
       harsh a measure? Simply because we had long come to the
       conclusion that it was time for us to burn something in the
       enemy's country. In the campaign of the preceding year, when
       our whole army had passed through your richest section of
       country, where the peaceful homes and fruitful fields only made
       the contrast with what he had left the more significant, many a
       man whose home was in ruins chafed under the orders from
       General Lee, which forbade him to touch them, but the orders
       were obeyed, and we left the homes and fields as we found
       them, the ordinary wear and tear of an army of occupation alone
       excepted. We had so often before our eyes the reverse of this
       wherever your army swept through Virginia, that we were
       thoroughly convinced of the justice of a stern retaliation.
        <p>It is no pleasure to me to have to recall the scenes of those
       days nor do I do so in any spirit of vindictiveness, but I simply tell 
       the truth in justification of an act which Mr. Hoke
       claims was without justification. We had followed Kilpatrick
       (I think it was), in his raid through Madison, Greene and other 
       counties, and had seen the cattle shot or hamstrung in  
       yards, the agricultural implements burned, the feather beds
       and clothing of the women and children cut in shreds in mere
       wantonness, farmhouse after farmhouse stripped of every particle of 
       provisions, private carriages cut and broken up, and women
       In tears lamenting all this. I do not put down here anything
       that I did not see myself. We had seen a thousand ruined homes
       in Clark, Jefferson and Frederick counties--barns and houses
       burned and private property destroyed-but we had no knowl-
       edge that this was done by official. orders."  At last when the
 official order came openly from General Hunter, and the burning
         and done thereunder, and when our orders of retalliation
         came they met with the approbation, as I have said, of every
         man who crossed the Potomac to execute them.
          <p>Of course we had nothing personal against your pretty 
       little town. It just so happened that it was the nearest and most
         accessible place of importance for us to get to. It was the un
         fortunate victim of circurmstances. Had it been further off an
         some other town nearer that other town would have gone an
         Chambersburg have been saved.
          THE PEOPLE OF CHAMBERSBURG
       
         <p>And now having given you the feelings and motives which
        actuated us, permit me to give my views of how your people
        felt about the affair. I must be frank enough to say that I
        think the reason the tribute demanded of you was not paid was
        because you people had no idea that the rebels would carry
        out their threat to bum; nor was this confidence shaken until
        the smoke and flames began to ascend. I know that this is directly 
        in the teeth of Mr. Hoke's tribute to the patriotism of his
        fellow-townsmen, that sooner than pay money to the rebels they
        saw their homes laid in ashes; but he is himself a little illogical 
        for he gives greater condemnation to a cruel enemy for burn-
        ing out a helpless people after they had shown to them that the
        banks had removed their deposits, and it was impossible for
        them to get the money demanded. Had your people believed,
        that the town was actually in danger I think they could have
        raised enough money to have avoided the catastrophe.
       
        <p>Why this confidence of security? It grew out of the
        position taken by your people during the war; that we were
        rebels, soon to be conquered; and that whatever cruelties were
        inflicted upon the homes of these rebels were in the nature of
        penalties for rebellious conduct; and that such like acts would
        never dare to be attempted against loyal men.  It was further
        strengthened by the fact than when the whole Rebel Army was
        in you rState, no atrocities were committed.  I saw this
        confidence, almost amounting to contempt, on our march to
        your town itself, when the negotiations, preliminary to the fire,
        were in progess. I happened with a comrade or two, to get behind the command on the march to the town, and, in passing, through a village of some size (I think it was Mercersburg), the knots of men on the corners poked fun at our appearance, and jeered us, and never seemed to consider that the men upon whom they expended their fun had pistols and sabres in their belts and might use them.  The strange part of the matter to us was to see able-bodied young men out of service- a sight never seen in the South during the war.  In Chambersburg itself, it seemed impossible to convince your people that we were in earnest.  they treated it as a joke, or thought it was a mere threat to get the money, and showed their sense of security and incredulity in every act.  <p>
THREE CLASSES OF BURNERS<P>
When the two brigades of Confederate calvary marched to your town the order came to certain regiments to burn it.  Our regiment, as a whole, according to the best of my recollection, was not sent in, but there were several detachments from it on different kinds of duty sent there, and I was one of them.  It was afterward a source of congratulation to our men that they not been detailed for the purpose, for although they regarded it as a proper measure of retaliation, they did not seek the unpleasant task.  The men who actually applied the torch may be classified in three divisions: First, those whose own homes had been ravaged or destroyed, or whose relations had suffered this way.  These men were anxious for the work to begin, and the spirit of revenge which actuated them made them apparently merciless.  There were many such in the brigade.  Second, the far larger portion who simply obeyed orders, as soldiers, and who saved what they could, and to whose humanity and liberal construction of the orders given them no doubt you must be thankful for the portion of the city that was saved.  Thirdly, the men to be found in all armies who looked upon the occasion as an oppurtunity to plunder, and who rejoiced in wanton destruction.  This last element was, I am glad to say, small, but I have no doubt to those who unfortunately came in contact with them they were but types of the whole command.<p><center>APPLYING THE
               TORCH.</center>
       
       <p>As I had never seen the town before, and did not know
       the names of your streets, I can give you no detailed account of
       the burning. After it began it was quickly done. Men plead to
       have their homes saved; but the women acted in a much calmer
       manner, after they understood the thing was inevitable: and in
       some cases, excited our admiration by their courage and
       defiance. I saw a number of houses fired, but I saw no abuse of
       the citizens. Through the scenes of terror which your people
       passed, I have read Mr. Hoke's annals in vain to find men- of an
       unarmed citizen injured, or a woman insulted. Some of the men
       became inflamed with liquor, but I believe they were few. The
       most usual method of burning was to break the furniture into
       splinters; pile in the middle of the floor and then fire it. This
       was done in the beginning, but as the fire became general, it was
       not necessary, as one house set fire to the other, Most of the
       houses were vacant when fired, the occupants having fled.
       
       <p>When the command was given to retire, it was quickly
       done.  One little incident which happened after we left the
       town will illustrate all I have said about the feeling which
       actuated many of our soldiers. I think it was two or three miles
       from the town (it may have been more or less), some of us
       halted for a few minutes to get a drink and perhaps something
       to eat. A brick farmhouse, with a porch, was located on the
       road, with a pump to the side of it. Not far off was what we
       called a Pennsylvania "Dutch barn," larger than the house. It
       was full of the recently gathered harvest, and bore all the
       evidence of a plentiful yield to a good farmer.  I hitched my
       horse to the lightning rod on the side of the barn next to the
       house, and was just returning to get him when some one cried
       "fire." In an instant the barn was in flames. I had hardly time to
       unhitch my horse. Some of our party demanded in angry tones
       of two troopers who came from the barn and mounted their
       horses, what they meant by such uncalled for vandalism. The
       reply was, "Why, d- it, they burnt our barn," and on they rode.
       
       <p>But I am making this letter longer than necessary, and
       must hurry on.<p>
<center>MOTIVE OF THE RETREAT</center>
One word about what happened after our retreat.  Mr. Hoke seems to think that the fear of Averill was uppermost in our minds.  This is a mistake.  Whatever may have een the motives that actuated the commanding officers the men did not fear him at all.  They had perfect confidence that they could whip him whenever he thought proper to give us the oppurtunity, and any soldier will tell you that a feeling like that means victory.  At one little town we stopped to feed our horses and rest.  His columns were in sight, but no attack was made.  As we passed through Hancock, his advance fired into our rear guard, and made a little dash at us.  I saw in this little fight Harry Gilmor, who was the last man to leave town, struck, and severely stung by a spent ball, which made him whistle with pain.  We also heard on the retreat that some of our men had been left in Chambersburg drunk, and had been throun in the flames by the citizens ad burned to death.  This was camp gossip with us, but I never heard it verified.<p>
We crossed the Potomac with some little opposition from an inrn-clad car in our front by the track of the B&O R.R., which was struck by a ball, fired by the Baltimore Light Artillery and immediately left.  We also had quite a severe little fight in the Blue Ridge Mountains, near Cold Spring, on the advance, in which several from our regiment were killed and wounded, and which a body of your calvary showed great spirit and determination; but aside from this we had no fighting at all.  I dislike again to destroy Mr. Hoke's very cleverly written annals; but the truth compels me to do so.  He says when Averill came up to us in the Moorefield Valley, and captured and scattered our command, that they charged us with the cry of "Remember Chambersburg," and cut us down without mercy.  The fact is, we were down when he charged us.  I will give you the plain, prodaic facts of which I was a victim.<p>
</td></tr></table></body></html>
       


       

