  APPENDIX S.

  HDQRS. DISTRICT OF FLORIDA,
  Jacksonville, Fla., March 25, 1864.
  GEN.: I have the honor to report that on February 20, at 6 a. m.,
  I left my position on the South Fork of the Saint Mary's (Barber's
  plantation) with the intention of advancing on Lake City, and, if
  successful, of destroying the railroad communication between East and
  West Florida at the Suwannee River, such being the general plan of
  operations upon which the occupation and control of East Florida had
  been founded. The command consisted of Col. G. V. Henry's
  mounted brigade (two squadrons Independent Battalion Massachusetts
  Cavalry, Maj. Stevens; the Fortieth Regt. Massachusetts
  Volunteers, and Elder's Horse Battery B, First U. S. Artillery, four
  guns), Col. J. R. Hawley's brigade (Seventh Connecticut, Capt.
  Skinner; Seventh New Hampshire, Col. J. C. Abbott; Eighth U. S.
  Colored Troops, Col. C. W. Fribley), Col. W. B. Barton's
  brigade (Forty-seventh New York, Col. H. Moore; Forty-eighth
  New York, Maj. W. B. Coan; One hundred and fifteenth New York,
  Col. S. Sammon), and Col. Montgomery's brigade (Fifty-fourth
  Massachusetts, Col. E. N. Hallowell; First North Carolina
  Volunteers, Lieut. Col. W. N. Reed), with Hamilton's Light
  Battery E, Third U. S. Artillery, six guns, and Langdon's Battery M,
  First U. S. Artillery, six guns (comprising a section of James' Rhode
  Island Battery, under Lieut. Metcalf). The entire force near 5,500
  officers and men and sixteen guns.

  Accurate information it was believed, as to the enemy's strength had
  been obtained, and the excellent character of the troops under my
  command forbade any doubt as to the propriety of a conflict on equal
  terms. After a march of 15 miles, and about 3 p. m., Col. Henry's
  cavalry came upon the enemy's infantry pickets somewhat to the east
  of Olustee. A couple of companies from the Seventh Connecticut soon
  drove them back upon their supports, which opened fire. Capt. Elder
  felt them with his guns, the remainder of the Seventh Connecticut was
  handsomely deployed forward, and under this display the enemy's
  position in line of battle was clearly developed. The ground was
  favorable for the movement of troops, being firm and even, and
  although covered with pine timber was devoid of underbrush. My
  intention was to engage the enemy in front with the artillery, supported
  by a regiment on either flank, while a brigade should be moved to the
  right so as to fall upon the prolongation of his line. The Seventh New
  Hampshire was accordingly thrown forward to the right, and the Eighth
  U. S. Colored Troops to the left, and Hamilton's and Langdon's batteries
  were brought up alongside of Elder's. The Seventh Connecticut had
  been energetically and successfully engaged in its work of driving in
  the enemy's skirmishers; it was now withdrawn from before our
  infantry. The Seventh New Hampshire, and old regiment, armed in part
  with the Spencer rifle, had scarcely deployed and felt the

  CHAP. LIII.]   THE FLORIDA EXPEDITION.   PAGE 289-65
  [Series I. Vol. 35. Part I, Reports and Correspondence. Serial No. 65.]

  
  enemy's fire before it broke in confusion, and the most strenuous
  efforts of Col. Hawley and its own colonel, assisted by
  Lieut.-Col. Hall, of my staff, could not reform or rally it, and
  this regiment counted as nothing during the remainder of the
  engagement. The Eighth U. S. Colored Troops formed promptly in
  position, lead by the gallant young Fribley, but he soon fell, and these
  men also, losing the stimulus of his command, gave way in disorder.
  The enemy closed up after these yielding regiments, and brought a
  close fire upon the artillery, which, nevertheless, was worked by its
  admirable officers with perfect tenacity and coolness. An unremitting
  fire was maintained upon the enemy's infantry, with the very best
  effect. Barton's brigade, close at hand, was now formed on the ground
  occupied by the Seventh New Hampshire, and the Fifty-fourth
  Massachusetts had replaced the Eighth U. S. Colored Troops a rapid
  fire was opened, the influence of which was soon visible. The left of the
  enemy's line was forced backward, and in the hope of still effecting my
  original intention, the First North Carolina was brought up to the right
  of Barton's brigade by Lieut.-Col. Reed in the most brilliant
  manner. The entire force was now hotly engaged save the cavalry.
  Col. Henry watched the flanks and prevented on the left a
  movement of the enemy's cavalry that threatened trouble. But the
  disparity in numbers was too great and the defense too obstinate to
  permit of decisive results. The struggle continued until dusk, and ended
  with cheers of defiance, and finding it hopeless, under existing
  circumstances, to advance farther, the troops were withdrawn in perfect
  order to Sanderson and then to the Saint Mary's, Col. Henry's
  cavalry, supported by the Seventh Connecticut, serving as rear guard.
  From loss of horses alone, I was compelled to leave six guns on the
  field, and a small portion of the badly wounded were left in the power
  of the enemy from sufficient means to remove them.

  The losses had been heavy, particularly among superior officers.
  Col. Fribley, a young man of high promise, had died in the full
  performance of his duty, nobly encouraging, his men to theirs.
  Lieut.-Col. Reed was mortally wounded while managing his
  regiment with conspicuous skill, and his major (Bogle) was severely
  hurt. Col. Moore, of the Forty-seventh, and Col. Sammon, One
  hundred and fifteenth New York, were both wounded, and Col.
  Sammon, although badly disabled, remained with his command until it
  left the field. Capt. Vandeveer, of the One hundred and fifteenth
  New York, an officer justly held in high esteem, lost his life-one of
  the greatest misfortunes of the day.

  A losing battle receives little praise, but officers and men, nevertheless,
  often display soldierly qualities far beyond those that are brought out
  by success. The conduct of Col. Barton's brigade was glorious, and
  I cannot too highly commend the pertinacity with which it held to its
  work. Its commander deserves greatly. Col.'s Hawley and
  Montgomery, also commanding brigades, conducted their troops with
  great personal intelligence and valor. Besides Col.'s Moore and
  Sammon should be mentioned Maj. Coan, Forty-eighth New York;
  Capt. Skinner, Seventh Connecticut, and Col. Hallowell,
  Fifty-fourth Massachusetts, as meriting more than usual praise for their
  excellent conduct. Col. Henry kept his cavalry in constant activity,
  watching and neutralizing that of the enemy, and by important and
  gallant

  19 R  R-VOL XXXV, PT I

  PAGE 290-65   S. C., FLA., AND ON THE GA. COAST.   [CHAP. LIII.
  [Series I. Vol. 35. Part I, Reports and Correspondence. Serial No. 65.]

  
  services before and after, as well as during the battle, was eminently
  useful. I desire to recommend him to you as a highly deserving officer.
  The artillery, as might have been expected, performed its part with great
  honor; guns were never better served, or under more trying
  circumstances. Exposed greatly to sharpshooters this force suffered
  correspondingly. Capt. Hamilton (chief of artillery), badly wounded,
  refused to quit the field, and with admirable coolness and fortitude
  continued his duties, and I must place on record here that this officer,
  well known to us as on of the most deserving and valuable of our
  service, should, as a mere act of justice, be advanced to a
  brigadier-generalship. Capt.'s Langdon and Elder also deserve the
  most decided appropriation. Lieut.'s Myrick, Third Artillery, and
  McCrea, First Artillery, severely wounded, exhibited courage and
  devotion of the highest order. The officers of my staff performed their
  duties to my unqualified satisfaction. Lieut.-Col. Hall,
  provost-marshal-general of the department, was very efficient, and I am
  much intended to him and to Maj. Eddy, Forty-eighth New York,
  assistant inspector-general, for constant and valuable aid. Lieut.
  Michie, U. S. Engineers, was always ready, always brave, always
  skillful. My personal aides, Lieut. C. N. Jackson and Lieut.
  Bradshaw, were conspicuously active, and both are to be commended
  for energy and courage. Capt. Dana, of the Signal Corps, was of
  great assistance to me, and to Surgeon Maj., for careful attention to
  his duties and medical director, on behalf of the wounded. I desire to
  express especial gratitude. To the reports of subordinate commanders,
  herewith inclosed, I must necessarily refer for mention of my other
  gallant officers whose conduct should not be overlooked or forgotten.

  The colored troops behaved creditably-the Fifty-fourth Massachusetts
  and First North Carolina like veterans. It was not in their conduct that
  can be found the chief cause of failure, but in the unanticipated yielding
  of a white regiment from which there was every reason to expect noble
  service, and at a moment when everything depended upon its firmness.
  The misfortune arose, doubtless, from this regiment having lately been
  filled with conscripts and substitutes of a very inferior class. The issue,
  so finely drawn that the battle was nearly equal to its very close, the
  enemy's losses as heavy as my own, ground firmly held to the last, the
  admirable temper of the command all indicate that but for the disparity
  arising from the causes indicated, this might fairly have been a victory.

  Respectfully, general, your most obedient servant,

  T. SEYMOUR,
  Brig.-Gen., U. S. Volunteers, Cmdg.

  Brig. Gen. J. W. TURNER,
  Chief of Staff.

  [Indorsement.]

  HDQRS. DEPARTMENT OF SOUTH CAROLINA,
  Hilton Head, S. C., November 1, 1865.

  In the foregoing report of Brig.-Gen. Seymour he says he moved
  forward on February 20-
