  PAGE 362-46   S. C. AND GA. COASTS, AND IN MID. AND E. FLA.   [CHAP. XL.
  [Series I. Vol. 28. Part I, Reports. Serial No. 46.]

  
  No. 15.

  Report of Col. Edward N. Hallowell, Fifty-fourth Massachusetts (Colored)
  Infantry.

  MORRIS ISLAND, S. C.,
  November 7, 1863.
  GEN.: In answer to your request that I furnish a report of the part taken
  by the Fifty-fourth Massachusetts Volunteers in the late assault upon Fort
  Wagner, I have to state:

  During the afternoon of the 18th of July last, the Fifty-fourth
  Massachusetts Volunteers, Col. R. G. Shaw commanding, landed upon Morris
  Island and reported at about 6 p. m. to Brig. Gen. G. C. Strong. Col.
  Shaw's command present consisted of a lieutenant-colonel of the field, a
  surgeon, adjutant and quartermaster of the staff, 8 captains, and 11
  subaltern officers of the line and 600 enlisted men. Gen. Strong presented
  himself to the regiment and informed the men of the contemplated assault
  upon Fort Wagner and asked them if they would lead it. They answered in the
  affirmative. The regiment was then formed in column by wing, at a point
  upon the beach a short distance in the advance of the Beacon House. Col. R.
  G. Shaw commanded the right wing, and Lieut. Col. E. N. Hallowell the left.
  In this formation, as the dusk of the evening came on, the regiment
  advanced at quick time, leading the column; the enemy opened upon us a
  brisk fire; our peace now gradually increased till it became a run. Soon
  canister and musketry begun to tell upon us. With Col. Shaw leading, the
  assault was commenced. Exposed to the direct fire of canister and musketry,
  and, as the ramparts were mounted, to a like fire on our flanks, the havoc
  made in our ranks was very great. Upon leaving the ditch for the parapet,
  they obstinately contested with the bayonet our advance. Notwithstanding
  these difficulties, the men succeeded in driving the enemy from most of
  their guns, many following the enemy into the fort. It was here, upon the
  crest of the parapet, that Col. Shaw fell; here fell Capt.'s Russell and
  Simpkins; here also were most of the officers wounded. The colors of the
  regiment reached the crest, and were there fought for by the enemy; the
  State flag then torn from its staff, but the staff remains with us.
  Hand-grenades were now added to the missiles directed against the men.

  The fight raged here for about an hour. When compelled to abandon the fort,
  the men formed a line about 700 yards from the fort, under the command of
  Capt. Luis F. Emilio, the ninth captain in the line. The other captains
  were either killed or wounded.

  The regiment then held the front until relieved by the Tenth Connecticut
  Regt. at about 2 a. m. of the 19th. The assault was made upon the south
  face of the fort. So many of the officers behaved with marked coolness and
  bravery, I cannot mention any above the others. It is due, however, to the
  following-named enlisted men that they be recorded above their fellows for
  special merit: Sergt. Robert J. Simmons, Company B; Sergt. William H.
  Carney, Company C; Corpl. Henry F. Peal, Company F; Private George Wilson,
  Company A.

  The following is the list of casualties: Col. R. G. Shaw, killed; Lieut.
  Col. E. N. Hallowell, wounded; Adjt. G. W. James, wounded; Capt. S.
  Willard, wounded; Capt. C. J. Russell,* missing, supposed killed; Capt. W.
  H. Simpkins,* missing, supposed killed; Capt.

