  PAGE 170-89   OPERATIONS IN SE. VA. AND N. C.   [CHAP. LIV.
  [Series I. Vol. 42. Part III, Correspondence, Etc. Serial No. 89.]

  
  September 29, inspired his command by his great personal bravery,
  coolness, and ability, until he fell severely wounded near the enemy's
  main line, He is promoted to major.

  First Lieut. Henry Peterson, Second U. S. Colored Cavalry, is
  promoted to a captaincy for gallantry and ability in conducting his
  company at New Market on the 29th of September, and for meritorious
  conduct in field and camp.

  Sergt. George Honesty, Company I, Second Colored Cavalry; First
  Sergt. Isaac Harris, Company F; Sergt. Gilbert Harris, Company F;
  Sergt. Reuben Parker, Company F; First Sergt. Randolph Driver,
  Company I, have honorable mention for conspicuous bravery on the
  skirmish line in the assault on the enemy's works September 29. Each
  has a medal.

  The regiments of this division having behaved with great gallantry in
  several actions, earning thereby the right to official notice, it is ordered
  that there be inscribed upon the colors of the First and Tenth U. S.
  Colored Troops the name Wilson's Wharf, that being the place where
  they defeated the cavalry of Fitzhugh Lee.

  That the Second U. S. Colored Cavalry have inscribed the word Suffolk
  on their colors, for their conduct in the battle of March 9, near that
  place.

  That the First, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, and Twenty-second U. S. Colored
  Troops have the word Petersburg inscribed on their banners, for their
  gallantry in capturing the line of works and the enemy's guns on the
  15th of June, 1864, at that place.

  That the First, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, Twenty-second, Thirty-sixth,
  Thirty-seventh, Thirty-eighth U. S. Colored Troops, and the Second U. S.
  Colored Cavalry have the words New Market Heights inscribed upon
  their colors, for their gallantry in carrying the enemy's works at that
  point on the 29th of September.

  The quartermaster is directed to furnish a new stand of colors to each
  of these regiments, with the inscription ordered.

  TENTH ARMY CORPS.
  FIRST DIVISION.
  First Brigade.

  First Sergt. William Hedges, Company I, Sixty-second Ohio, is
  commended for cool and courageous conduct while in command of his
  company on the reconnaissance toward Richmond September 29. He is
  recommended to His Excellency the Governor of Ohio for promotion.

  First Sergt. John R. Murray, Company G, Sixty-second Ohio, is
  recommended to His Excellency the Governor of Ohio for promotion for
  good conduct, having long been in command of his company.

  Second Brigade.

  Col. Joseph C. Abbott, Seventh New Hampshire, commanding
  Second Brigade, First Division, is recommended for brevet for his
  gallant and soldierly conduct since the campaign commenced, and for
  the skillful and able manner in which his brigade was led to the rebel
  works within two miles of Richmond on the 1st instant.

